---
title: "Introduction: The Spirit of Generosity"
---

As monks, we try very hard not to talk about food. One of the reasons for this is for our own restraint around sense pleasures, but another is that the offering is really best when it comes from a pure intention of the donor. It creates a tremendous amount of wholesome effect in their lives and if people are worried about what to offer or how to offer or how much to offer, it can distract from the sincere intention.

But also, sometimes our efforts to not talk about food just end up creating anxiety and speculation for the donor about what food a monk would really want and whether the offering was done correctly or not. I see it as very essential that people make offerings in whatever way they feel good about, and not feel that any offering no matter what type wasn’t good enough. Because I know how much these sorts of concerns can affect people, I thought it might be useful to use it as an opportunity to write about the importance and role of generosity in the path to liberation.

The role of a sincere offering is absolutely central. It is where the path starts. What is important about generosity is that it is accessible to everyone who is willing to make that choice. No matter how much one is struggling, no matter how much suffering one has undergone, no matter how little one has, an act of generosity is always possible. And even when the act is done imperfectly or for the wrong reasons or without even knowing why it is being done, it still has a tremendously positive effect on the giver.

The Buddha said that if people really knew the benefits of generosity like he did, they wouldn’t let an opportunity go by without offering something to someone else ([Itivuttaka 26](https://suttacentral.net/iti26/en/sujato?lang=en&layout=plain&reference=none&notes=asterisk&highlight=false&script=latin)). It has a massively positive effect and offers people a wholesome joy and happiness and peace. This wholesome happiness and peace is absolutely central to the path. If people don’t have access to that happiness that comes from having done something good and wholesome, it is much easier to succumb to feelings of despair and insecurity and frustration. That happiness and peace that comes from generosity can offer the possibility that goodness is possible and we are capable of accomplishing it. It is the central piece of believing that we are worthy enough to do good, to become better, and eventually to be free.

The world is awash with reminders of sense gratification, but the reminders of wholesomeness are few. When we can remember that potential it can offer us hope, not just that happiness and peace are available to someone else, but that it is available to ourselves as well. No one is so low that they don’t have that possibility for an act of kindness and generosity. It is that hope that can offer us a life preserver amidst the tremendous suffering around us.

Acts of generosity are important not just for us to intellectually acknowledge, but to get familiar with the internal experience of the benefit. It is important to reflect on those moments until we can get a clear internal, intuitive sense of what goodness feels like. Because, the nature of goodness is that it feels good in a very peaceful and balanced way. It offers a steady foundation to be able to progress further. Getting to that point where we know and can call on the felt experience of goodness is extremely important. As long as the deeper aspects of our consciousness haven’t been able to recognize the benefits of goodness, it won’t be able to recognize the way out of suffering. The more that this experience is felt and recognized in its peaceful and balanced quality, the more that the deeper aspects of consciousness can settle and relax into that peace. This is the benefit of generosity. This is also the benefit of morality, having a clean and ethical life in which we try to do good and realize that good is possible within ourselves.

From that basis of having done good and having avoided hurting others, we can develop access to a deep and abiding sense of happiness from which joy can arise. This is what can sustain our lives, our energy, our practice, our hope to keep getting better. Without it, the practice will always be a struggle. It will always feel less fulfilling that it should. So, actively reflecting on the good that we have done and the efforts we have put to not do anything to harm others until we can access that peace is what makes the whole rest of the path possible.

With the happiness generated by generosity and acts of kindness and compassion we can sustain a long-term effort to make ourselves better. We can start to see all the problems sense pleasures create in our lives and our world, and we can start to recognize how much our attachments drive our suffering. When we have that happiness of the wholesome we have a support, a grounding for going further, but without it, or even if we just can’t recognize the good that is already in ourselves, then our faith and our hope can be shaken.

But when that foundation of morality and generosity is strong, there is no limit to the potential of human consciousness. When one is familiar with that happiness and peace, the allure of sense pleasures isn’t as strong, because one can see the alternative. One can see the damage that they are doing. One has something to build on, to rest on, to take refuge in when things get painful and difficult, when renunciation seems like too much, and when leaving our attachment behind seems beyond what is possible.

It is that happiness and peace that I hope people feel when they make any offering. The Buddha would often offer his congratulations and anumodana, a happiness with you, that one has made an offering. It is the beginning of the way to ultimate peace.

I hope you can all feel all the benefits of your tremendous offerings to me and to all those around you. It is the way out. It is the way to a happy and unconflicted inner world. It is the way to ultimate peace.

--Venerable Jeffrey
